## Prerequisites
Too many times we are sold this idea that security is some kind of "black magic" which could only be mastered by a selected few and the rest of us could only hope we won't suffer any security attack. Another common idea is that by simply adding a tool to your project it will automatically take care of all the security issues. The truth is, security cannot happen in a vacuum, it is determined in a very high degree by the culture of the team and the development practices used. Here are a few general software development techniques which, as a side-effect, could greatly increase the level of security of your application:
1. **Code maintainability** - Many of the security issues are actually general programming or business rules bugs which happen to have a significant impact on one or more of the components in CIA triad. Writing maintainable code will make spotting errors in code a lot easier and, at the same time, will reduce the likelihood of security issues to hide in your code as well.
1. **Automated tests** - There are many benefits provided by writing automated tests in your project, to name just a few: demonstrates that the code works as expected, provides regression in case of code changes and refactoring, promotes better design and modularity (hence improving maintainability), helps onboarding new team members etc. It's advisable to first have a strong foundation in writing functional tests before thinking about integrating security testing. First, functional tests will be able to catch some of the security bugs as well, and having no foundation in place for automated testing will make your life impossible in adding security testing. Most of the times, security tools are a lot slower and hard to configure.
1. **CI/CD pipeline** - Having a build and integration pipeline will give you a way to reliably push changes to production reliably and fast in order to constantly improve your product. The question is not "if", but "when" a security issue will hit your organisation. Having a delivery pipeline in place will give you the opportunity to react quickly by either releasing a fix or rolling back the faulty changes. More than that, the CI/CD pipeline offers a good approach to inject security gateways in order to assure a baseline in terms of security checks.
1. **Code review** - Through code review or pair programming you will most likely spot many issues in bussiness logic or implementation related issues. That will also get rid of security issues too as a side-effect.
1. **Domain Driven Design** - See "Secure by Design" book for details. An example is to confirm with the domain experts what a specific concept should look like. e.g. the name of a user should most likely only consist of letters and maybe other known characters, but clearly there is no chance a user will ever have a name including < or > (generally dangerous characters as are part of HTML tags like `<script>` which could result in XSS vulnerabilities if the browser gets to execute that text). So the idea is that simply by clearly defining the concepts and thinking more in terms of white listing rather than blacklisting it will take you a long way towards improving your application's security as well. Simply by defining immutable value objects (or domain primitives) that will help you mititgate security issues. By focusing on the domain, many security bugs are solved implicitly.
1. **Defensive programming** - make sure you properly check for valid inputs and b cautious.

In summary, application security is only one piece of the whole software development mechanism, so make sure you look at the whole context when addressing security concerns. Promoting a quality oriented culture within your team or organisation by covering the foundations will lead you a long way to increasing the security level too.

! **Note:** it is not my intention to suggest that one should not think about security, or that by following the guidelines stated above your systems will automatically be in a secure state. It's rather the case that these are the things which, in my opinion, should be already put in place before even thinking about more advanced topics of scurity. If you don't follow those practices most likely you have bigger problems than security anyway.